Poster à la Sauce Hollandaise
=============================

Difficulty: **...
Preparing time: 1 hour
Cooking time: 2 hours


Ingredients
===========

- 2 texts quite long, likely to have words in common
- some elbow grease
- some Helvetica Bold, or better: a freed equivalent


Utensils
========

- `comm`
- `tr`
- `cat`
- `sort`
- `uniq`
- `grep` (optional)
- `less` (optional)
- `enscript`
- `ps2pdf`


Steps
======
01. Go to the project directory.
    `cd my_path/PleaseMakeMeDesign`

02. Create a new directory where you will work in.
    `mkdir wip`

03. Go to this directory.
    `cd wip`

04. Display the content of the first file in the shell.
    `cat ../texts/file_1.txt`

05. Put every word on a new line.
    `cat ../texts/file_1.txt | tr " " "\n"`

06. Suppress punctuation.
    `cat ../texts/file_1.txt | tr " " "\n" | tr -d [:punct:]`

07. Make everything lowercase.
    `cat ../texts/file_1.txt | tr " " "\n" | tr -d [:punct:] | tr [:upper:] [:lower:]`

08. Sort by alphabetical order.
    `cat ../texts/file_1.txt | tr " " "\n" | tr -d [:punct:] | tr [:upper:] [:lower:] | sort`

09. Removes all duplicate words.
    `cat ../texts/file_1.txt | tr " " "\n" | tr -d [:punct:] | tr [:upper:] [:lower:] | sort | uniq`

10. Save the result in a file.
    `cat ../texts/file_1.txt | tr " " "\n" | tr -d [:punct:] | tr [:upper:] [:lower:] | sort | uniq > word_list_1.txt`

11. Repeat steps 1 to 7 with the second text.
    `cat ../texts/file_2.txt | tr " " "\n" | tr -d [:punct:] | tr [:upper:] [:lower:] | sort | uniq > word_list_2.txt`

12. Compare the words used in both texts (common words are in the middle).
    `comm word_list.txt word_list_2.txt`  
    Tip: use a *pager* to be able to scroll up and down.
    `comm word_list_1.txt word_list_2.txt | less`

13. Select an interesting word in the result (with 5 lines before and after).
    `comm word_list_1.txt word_list_2.txt | grep -C 5 "anyword"`

14. Layout the text in a pdf (play with variable elements !).
    `comm word_list_1.txt word_list_2.txt | grep -C 5 "anyword" | enscript -B -f 'Helvetica-Bold@18/19' -T 16 -p 'my_pdf.ps'`

15. Convert the postscript file to a pdf file.
    `comm word_list_1.txt word_list_2.txt | grep -C 5 "anyword" | enscript -B -f 'Helvetica-Bold@18/19' -T 16 -p 'my_pdf.ps' | ps2pdf my_pdf.ps`


Alternative end
===============

14. Layout the text on an A4 with automatic font-size so that it fits the page vertically. (the output file is "my_pdf.pdf")
    `comm word_list_1.txt word_list_2.txt | grep -C 5 "anyword" | ../scripts/./v-justify.sh`

15. Convert the postscript file to a pdf file.
    `comm word_list_1.txt word_list_2.txt | grep -C 5 "anyword" | ../scripts/./v-justify.sh | ps2pdf my_pdf.ps`

Here you are! You now have a wonderful Dutch style poster!

