## WHAT IS IN A NAME
November 5th, 2008 -- Femke Snelting

Of course we discuss now and then amongst ourselves, whether it is better to change ‘Open Source Publishing’ to: ‘Free Software Publishing’ (FSP…), or maybe: ‘Free, Libre and Open Source Publishing’ (FLOSP!). Reading [Rob Myers][1] text *‘Open Source Art Again’* makes me bring it up here:

  > The name Open Source was deliberately chosen for its meaninglessness and
  > ideological vacuity. This was intended to make the results of a very
  > strong ideology more palatable to large corporations by disguising its
  > origins. That ideology is Free Software.[^1]

[When we started OSP in 2006][2], we were only vaguely aware of the many cultures within F/LOSS and merely interested in the idea of Open Source because it felt as an invitation to *“open up your sources”*. We were trying to re-do design practice, and that seemed a good place to start. For us, however confused our understanding might have been at the time, *Open Source* was an inspiring thought that went much further than what software we used under which license.  

At this point I would say we are most of all interested in the generative and generous [‘four freedoms’][3] that form the core of *Free Software* and try to imaginatively apply them to design. I guess you could describe what we do as a creative version of *Free Culture activism*, although also [that term][4] is not without confusion.

  > The representational freedom of artists, part of which is the freedom to
  > depict and build or comment on existing culture, to continue the
  > conversation of culture, is the freedom of art.[^2]

Which might explain why we [replaced our full name][5] by the acronym ‘OSP’ in the blog header, why we prefer the [Free Art License][6] over more neutrally formulated [Creative Commons Licenses][7] and if you’ve followed this site for a while, you must have noticed that we slowly became more careful about using the terms [‘F/LOSS’][8] and [‘Free Software’][9] rather than [‘Open Source’][10].

We understand why the difference between *Free Software* and *Open Source Software* matters and are grateful for the relentless energy of people around us to make the difference clear. But besides the fact that our lateral kind of practice does not really work from a clear cut definition, [Free Software thinking][11] poses problems when you try to extend it to a larger domain than just software. It tends to want to separate the ‘useful’ from the ‘artistic’ expression (what does that mean for design?), and in general it does not go well with non-digital objects. Interesting problems, but we’re not sure what to think about all this yet.

So, after all, for now, we decided to stick to our initial name: **Open Source Publishing**!

  [^1]: Rob Myers, Open Source Art Again, 2006 [http://www.robmyers.org/weblog/2006/09/19/open-source-art-again/](http://www.robmyers.org/weblog/2006/09/19/open-source-art-again/) (Find an extended version of this text in FLOSS+Art, GOTO10, 2008)
  [^2]: idem^
  
  [1]: http://robmyers.org/